name: GitHub_Actions_in_Action
isbn13: 9781633437302
title: [GitHub Actions in Action](https://www.manning.com/books/github-actions-in-action)
author: Michael Kaufmann
author: Rob Bos
author: Marcel de Vries
publisher: Manning
year: 2024
acquired: 2024-06-02
start: 2024-06-25
stop: 2024-07-17

I put code on GitHub.  GitHub Actions make it possible to have some form of
CI/CD to do some post-processing every time I commit changes.  I was hoping this
book would help me grok all that I can do using GitHub Actions.

GitHub Actions has [extensive documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions).
So why buy a book about it when all this documentation is available for free?  I
usually have a hard time following online documentation.  It is fine if you want
to zero in on something and get exhaustive information about it.  But if you
don't know what you need to look for, it can be frustrating.  A book provides
better context and a more cohesive learning experience.

As much as I want the book to cover and explain all the pieces, I realize as
GitHub Actions releases new features, the book will become more and more
out-of-date.  They have to balance being useful here and now versus still being
relevant years later.  There are links to the online documentation;  I hope
these links stay alive for a long time. The authors often provide a cursory look
at a given concept and follow it with a "for more, look up this link."  This can
get annoying when they've just introduced something that interests me, and I'm
looking forward to how I can apply it in my projects, only to be thrown back to
the documentation.

The book does a good job walking the reader through small example workflows that
get you familiar with the tools: the workflow designer, the marketplace, the
reporting in the GitHub UI.  But these example workflows and actions are too
trivial to teach you anything about building real, useful ones.  "Hello World"
can only get you so far.  It would be nice to follow the "Hello World" examples
with a more fleshed out example that does some of the things people want to do
in their CI.  Compile some code and publish the resulting artifacts.  They
mention that actions can publish to package managers, but at least one fleshed
out example would have been better.  One example for each of the major stacks
would be better.  One example for Java with Gradle, Ruby on Rails, and Node
would have been best for me.  There are three authors, surely they have some
bandwidth.  

WebStorm has decent support for GitHub workflows.  The book also mentions VS
Code.  The online workflow designer on [github.com](https://guthub.com/) is
pretty good, too, but can only edit one file at a time.  It does have the
marketplace right there in the UI, which is very handy.

I can write GitHub actions as Docker images that run on _runners_.  Maybe I can
use a Docker image of Dependency Finder to create multiple actions that match
what's offered by the Ant tasks.  A repo could use GitHub actions to build its
software, and then run either `JarJarDiff` or `OOMetrics` to generate reports.

The one large-ish deployment example heavily relies on Kubernetes in Azure
Cloud.  They use existing actions to interact with Kubernetes, which hides some
of the complexity.  There **is** an example step that calls `kubectl` and uses
the output to set an environment variable, or call `dotnet` commands to run
end-to-end tests and write the results to the workflow summary.  An additional,
non-container example would have been helpful, too.

The section on OIDC finally showed some breath by showing the same
authentication flow across Azure, AWS, and GCP.  But these flows would just
authenticate and then echo something to demonstrate they had access.  Instead,
it would have been useful to do some real deployment work instead and make the
example a little deeper.
