A while back, someone sent me
[this article on the Outbox pattern](https://debezium.io/blog/2019/02/19/reliable-microservices-data-exchange-with-the-outbox-pattern/).
The basic idea is to do a double write to the database: one to write the actual
data and another to create a change message in an `outbox` table.  A separate
thread or process monitors the `outbox` table and copies new messages to a
message broker like Kafka or RabbitMQ.  It provides transactional
characteristics; if the database transaction fails, both the written data and
the outbound message get removed together.

It is an interesting take on the Change Data Capture pattern from Newman's
[_Monolith to Microservices_](Books.html#Monolith_to_Microservices).  This CDC
pattern attaches directly to the database's change log.  It is tightly coupled
to the choice of database.

The article comes from [Debezium](https://debezium.io/), a CDC tool.  They use a
neat trick where they create the message and delete it in the same transaction.
The table will remain empty, but the database's change log will have a record of
the `INSERT` statement.  It's interesting from the point of view of managing the
size of the table.  But, it doesn't help with retrying messages that fail being
sent.  Either the CDC needs to track where it is in the log across a restart, or
else we can add columns in the `outbox` table to track how messages are being
handled.  Depending on how familiar you are with your database, it may be easier
to monitor a database table than a database change log.
