I'm writing a Ruby on Rails class that generates [JWTs](https://jwt.io/) based
on some business logic.  I created some helper methods to deal with the actual
JWT generation (using the `json-jwt` gem) and I put these methods in a helper
class.  I used constructor injection to pass the helper class in my code.

A colleague is arguing that since my helper methods are all stateless, I could
have made them class methods instead.  This way, the caller wouldn't have to
hold on to an instance of the helper class.  It would just call the class
methods directly.

My main objection had to do with testability.  I have been programming in Java
for a long time.  And in Java, it is very difficult to mock class methods.  With
instance methods on a helper object, I can inject a mock of the helper object
and program the method that's being called.  My tests can inject a test double
to simulate the production of JWTs without having to bother with all the details
that are not relevant to the test at hand.

Calling class methods also rubs against my perception of object-oriented systems
as collections of objects that exchange messages amongst them.  The _class_ is
an abstract concept, constructs, to describe the participants in the system.
They are not, technically speaking, participants themselves. See
[Alan Kay on Messaging](https://wiki.c2.com/?AlanKayOnMessaging)

More often than not, statics are globals in disguise.  See the Singleton Pattern
and [why they are bad](https://wiki.c2.com/?SingletonsAreEvil).

But the Ruby language is so malleable that is is easy for tests to replace even
a class method with their own stub.  Using them doesn't quite feel like passing
messages between participating objects, but at least mocking them is not an
undue burden on the unit tests.
