A colleague showed me an article in the October 2004 IEEE Computer magazine
by Victor Skowronski.  The title says it all:
_Do Agile Methods Marginalize Problem Solvers?_  In it, he says that great
problem solvers work alone, at their own pace, and make progress in quantum
leaps that cannot be rationalized or predicted.  Since agile methods focus on
collaboration and teamwork and small iteration that track progress, they make
it hard for the solitary problem solvers to contribute effectively.  The
author argues that problem solvers are the best programmers, so an
organization that adopts agile methods effectively cuts itself from its best
elements.

That's a whole lot of baloney!

He is saying that entire organizations should jump through hoops in order to
accomodate prima donas.  It's OK if everbody else is miserable and morale is
very low.  The exceptional and unpredictable talent of the prima dona will
make up for it and pull the organization through.  When you find a business
manager that buys this, let me know.

The reality of modern day software development is that it is a team effort.
The biggest challenge is managing the development itself and making sure that
the business side will get what they need in time.  There are still hard
problems that require lots of intellectual work, but there are many more
projects that are mundane and require a large amount of less hard work.  On the
typical corporate project, you need teamwork and predictability which is what
agile methods give you.

The author also contends that hard problems can only be solved by solitary
labor, where the problem solver must reflect on the problem and will eventually
receive illumination.  I am not ready to admit that this is the only way to go.
There are many examples of really hard problems tackled successfully by large
teams: the space programs, the Panama Canal, modern computers.  For large teams
to work, you need good communication within the team and the ability to tap
everyone's potential.  Making everyone miserable and resting all your hopes on
one miracle worker is irresponsible.
