Got into an argument of [jMock](http://jmock.org) versus
[EasyMock](http://easymock.org).  I like jMock better.  I find its syntax
more expressive and it lets me do more things with less typing.  I really like
how it can return "innocuous values" by default.  0 for numbers, &quot;&quot; for
Strings, ignored mocks for any class, etc.  If I don't care about a given
return value, I can let jMock handle it and not worry about it.  It's really
nice.  I often hear from people who don't like jMock that they looked at it a
long time ago and didn't like what they were seeing.  Early versions of jMock
had severe limitations, but jMock 2 is much, much better.

I wrote a Ruby script to parse some _grep_ output to help me ascertain which is
most popular at work.  I essentially did this:

    $ find . -name "*.java" -print | xargs grep -R -l org.easymock | wc -l
    _X_
    $ find . -name "*.java" -print | xargs grep -R -l org.jmock | wc -l
    _Y_

And got that _X_ was much larger than _Y_.  Bummer.  Then, I started thinking.
If I have one project using EasyMock with 1000 files and one project using
jMock with only 50 files, my grep output would make it look like EasyMock is
used 20:1 compared to jMock, whereas in fact, it's more like 1:1; one project
on one side, one project on the other side.  So I wrote a quick Ruby script to
capture the projects instead of just files.  By project, I mean the third word
in package names like `com.<company>.<project>`.  I wrote my script
as:

```ruby
$!/usr/bin/env ruby -w

projects = Hash.new(0)

ARGF.each do |line|
    if (line =~ /src\/com\/\w+\/(\w+)\//)
        projects[$1] += 1
    end
end

projects.sort.each {|pair| puts "#{pair[0]} -> #{pair[1]}"}
```

I paired with Dave Astels to tap into his immense knowledge of Ruby.  His style
is more in tune with functional programming than mine, but we ended up with
something that was both liked.  I learned a bit about `puts`, he learned about
`ARGF`.

This script lets me see what the "projects" are and how many files are in each.

    $ find . -name "*.java" -print | xargs grep -R -l org.easymock | collect_projects.rb | wc -l
    _X'_
    $ find . -name "*.java" -print | xargs grep -R -l org.jmock | collect_projects.rb | wc -l
    _Y'_

This time, the ratio of _X'_ to _Y'_ is 4:1.  A little better.  At work, we
still use EasyMock predominantly, but I can still make a case for using jMock.
:-)

Which is what I did in the afternoon, as I was pairing with someone.  I got
them to start using jMock to test some specific piece of behavior.  As we went
along, we came upon a nasty situation: the class under test creates a structure
and then passes it to a collaborator that knows how to populate it.  The
behavior we wanted to exercise then depends on the structure having been
properly populated.  But we are mocking the collaborator!  I can write an
expectation that the `populate()` method got called, but how can I have the
mock modify the structure that was passed in as one of the parameters?  This is
how I learned about jMock's `CustomAction` and how to stub side-effects in my
expectations.  It looks ugly, but it allowed us to write a test quickly instead
of having to embark on a lengthy refactoring right on the spot.  It was kind of
nice.  I learned something today!
