I attended a webinar by Barbara Warthen where she tried to compare software
development with software engineering.  She's a process consultant and she
basically exhorted the virtues of heavy-weight processes.  She used the usual
comparison of building a doghouse as opposed to a skyscraper and how the degree
of complexity in software has shot up since the '50s.  One nice thing is that
she did provide updated data from the Standish Group on project success rates.
Things haven't changed much since the '70s.

She tried to compare current project management practices to buying a car,
saying the current state of affair was more like getting only half the
features: no brakes, no steering, etc.  Actually, I think the analogy works
pretty well indeed.  The advertisement says "starting at $9,999.99" but they
show you the $20,000 model with all options.  If you want the car on display,
you're gonna have to pay a lot more in the end, or if you stick the price, you
won't get what you were expecting.  I was kinda happy to see this one backfire
on her.  :-)

She described software engineering as applying common sense to solving
problem.  To her, that's the essence of engineering in general.  The fact that
software is not a physical entity was irrelevant.  I don't fully agree.  The
fact that software is not physical changes the whole economics of producing
software.

She talked a little bit about IEEE software engineering standards and
[SWEBOK](http://www.swebok.org/).  She also touched on the
[SEI](http://www.sei.cmu.edu/)'s CMM level.  All sources that
advocate very heavy processes.  She did touch on agile methodologies toward the
end, quoting common sense things like don't do documentation for the sake of
documentation or don't follow your process for the sake of jumping through
hoops.  But she didn't go to any great length about this.

In the end, she claimed a good process and big design up front paid for
themselves by reducing programming time.  Since all the decision are made
during analysis and design, the coding phase is drastically simplified.  The
way I understand this is that the analysts and designers call all the shots and
validates their decisions using vaporware.  Coding is reduced to mindless
drivel for code monkeys to do.  I don't care much to work in that kind of
environment.  Life is short, I want to enjoy it and find fun and fulfillment in
my work.  I don't care for being someone else's code monkey.

So overall, the webinar was useful and informative.  It provided a lot of
good and useful information.  But in the end, I choose to disagree with her
about the usefulness of heavyweight processes.
