I watched [Startup Lessons Learned](http://sllconf.com) through their live
broadcast.  Here are my takeaways from the sessions I watched.

_Kent Beck_: His beliefs in keeping the code clean at all times are eroding.  In
a startup context, you want to keep the code clean enough that it doesn't slow
you down but you don't want to waste time making things perfect.

_Ash Maurya_: Continuous deployment is the new cool thing.  They deploy code in
small chunks as soon as it is passes the tests.  They deploy all the code for a
feature over time.  Code deployment is automated, but feature deployment is
still managed.  I suppose they have a large switchboard somewhere that says
which features are turned on for which class of users.

_Farb Nivi_:  At Grockit, they use
[Pivotal Tracker](http://www.pivotaltracker.com/) to manage their stories.
They try to keep them as narratives of what the user does and not as dry
specifications for the engineers.  They hire smart developers regardless of
which language they know and expect to pick up Grockit's language and
idiosyncrasies as part of ramping up.  Interviews consist of pairing for a day.
Farb was using
[Prezi](http://prezi.com/) for his presentation, which was very cool (except
it was hard to read the text on the broadcast).

_IMVU_: They push code multiple times a day, which can be a difficult adjustment
for new hires that come from large institutions that used to push code only once
a year.  Things that are "everybody's job" quickly become "nobody's job", so
it's good to make sure each task has a champion.  They do post mortems all the
time and don't punish failure, assuming you learned something, at least.

_Dave McClure_: He led a panel discussion on the role of design.  You should try
to get an emotional response from the user.  Have them either love it or hate
it, stay away from the middle of mediocrity.  If someone hates your product,
that gives you a concrete actionable item.  He pointed to Kathy Sierra and her
blog [Creating Passional Users](http://headrush.typepad.com/), it shows good
use of simple graphics to carry a point across.  A panelist brought up that
agile is well entrenched in the world of coding now, but waterfall is still
strong in the world of design.

_Randy Komisar_: There was a nice interview with Randy Komisar, a VC with
Kleiner Perkins, where he talked about his latest book,
[Getting to Plan B](http://amzn.com/1422126692),
about a company's ability to _pivot_, or realize what they are currently doing
is not going to lead to success and they need to start going in a new direction.
He mentioned working with [Pinger](http://pinger.com), the VP Eng there is a
very good friend of mine so there was a nice personal connection there.
Successful companies pivot many, many times.  You could say they never really
stop pivoting.

_Aardvark_: They did a lot of "Wizard of Oz testing", where a live operator is
pretending to be the software, before they wrote their first code.  It allowed
them to test lots of ideas quickly before making an investment in code.  They
were eventually acquired by Google.

_Flowtown_: A startup is a sinking ship from day 1.  You will have to make hard
decision and you will piss off users.  Get used to it and grow a thicker skin.
You shouldn't be afraid to anger your first few users if it lets you learn how to
satisfy all the ones that come after them.  Prototype fast and furiously.  Pivot
hard and take no prisoners.

[_Steve Blank_](http://steveblank.com/): This session is well worth watching,
if you can find the video.  He presented a model where a startup is meant to
search for a business model that works as opposed to a large enterprise that is
meant to execute a business model efficiently.  Startups are small and nimble
and staffed by entrepreneurs.  Creativity is key to look for new models and try
them out.  Large enterprises have a model and they scale it up with professional
management.  There is a transition step in the middle where the founders usually
depart or are thrown out.  That's when you've found a working business model and
you have to become less creative and more managed.  Entrepreneurs constantly
start new startups, they don't become captains of large industry.

Thanks to Troy Angrignon who posted
[detailed notes on Startup Lessons Learned](http://docs.google.com/View?id=atp5cgp89zw_396dqk483hd)
in a public Google document.
