We have a problem at work in that we're still using Grails 1.3.7, which is about
five years old.  We couldn't switch to Grails 2.0 when it came out because it
meant porting all of our code.  There was too much code and we couldn't stop
shipping features for the time it would take to port all the existing code.
This has hampered our ability to use newer plugins that were written against
Grails 2.0.

Now, Grails 3.0.1 just came out.  The migration guide says:

> The best approach to take when upgrading a plugin or application (and if your
> application is using several plugins the plugins will need upgrading first) is
> to create a new Grails 3.0 application of the same name and copy the source
> files into the correct locations in the new application.

So, basically a new port all over again.  Maybe we'll be able to port our app
directly from 1.3.7 to 3.0.1.  Someday.

I thought this sucked pretty badly, until a came upon a discussion in the
AngularJS world that AngularJS 2.0 is not backwards compatible and porting
applications written with AngularJS 1.0 to the new AngularJS 2.0 will require a
fair bit of rewrite.  So even though our situation with Grails is uncomfortable,
at least we are not alone.  At least one other platform is forcing its
developers to do major rewrites in order to upgrade to their latest and greatest
version.

Then, I came upon a tweet that said
"[One does not simply upgrade Rails](https://twitter.com/agile_memes/status/568718928345583616)",
as a parody of Boromir saying "One does not simply walk into Mordor."

And then, I saw this
[keynote by Guido van Rossum where he talks about the woes of upgrading to Python 3](https://youtu.be/G-uKNd5TSBw?t=2m20s).
One more platform where upgrades will be difficult this year.

I guess we're in great company indeed.
