Jason Fried and DHH made a sensation today by
[redefining the culture at Basecamp](https://world.hey.com/jason/changes-at-basecamp-7f32afc5).
They want employees to be able to focus on their work without feeling coerced
into the social reckoning that is happening everywhere nowadays.  Needless to
say, the Internet and the Twitterverse didn't take kindly to it.  They are being
accused of sitting on their privilege.  They are being called insensitive to the
realities of minorities in their employees.  I've suspected for a long time that
these two "mavericks" read too much in their singular experience at Basecamp and
didn't really have a leg to stand on.  Now, a lot more people are catching on.
While I can relate to their desire to just lose themselves into their work, the
way they are going about it is insensitive.

I did like Jason Fried's quote of Aldous Huxley about how even though we try to
relate and empathize with one another, we're still alone in our heads.

> We live together, we act on, and react to, one another; but always and in all
> circumstances we are by ourselves.  The martyrs go hand in hand into the
> arena; they are crucified alone.  Embraced, the lovers desperately try to fuse
> their insulated ecstasies into a single self-transcendence; in vain.  By its
> very nature every embodied spirit is doomed to suffer and enjoy in solitude.
> <footer>The Doors of Perception</footer>

Though, from what I've gathered, it seems to come from one of Huxley's less
thought out works.  Its contents came to him in psychedelic and exalted states.
