I tried to set up LangChain in Python.  I'm on a MacBook Pro, a very popular
hardware for developers.  I'm using Python, the newly crowned
[most popular programming language](https://github.blog/news-insights/octoverse/octoverse-2024/),
and its latest version `3.13`.  I'm installing LangChain, the most hyped
technology nowadays.  Why is it failing miserably?

```bash
pip install langchain
```

```
Collecting langchain
[...]
Collecting numpy<2.0.0,>=1.26.0 (from langchain)
  Using cached numpy-1.26.4.tar.gz (15.8 MB)
  Installing build dependencies ... done
  Getting requirements to build wheel ... done
  Installing backend dependencies ... done
  Preparing metadata (pyproject.toml) ... error
  error: subprocess-exited-with-error
[...]
      In file included from ../numpy/core/src/common/common.hpp:8:
      ../numpy/core/src/common/utils.hpp:10:10: fatal error: 'type_traits' file not found
         10 | #include <type_traits>
            |          ^~~~~~~~~~~~~
      1 error generated.
[...]
```

The `langchain` module depends on an older version of `numpy`.  I can use `pip`
to install the latest NumPy just fine.  But it balks at the older version.  Why
does LangChain have an obsolete dependency on NumPy?

I surmise most Python developers are on [Jupiter Notebook](https://jupyter.org/)
and/or are hosted on some Unix system, where compiling older NumPy is just fine.
I guess only a minority of Python programmers run locally on their MacBook Pro.

The [PyPI page for `langchain`](https://pypi.org/project/langchain/) mentions a
brand new (to me) package manager: [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/).
With it, I was able to install `langchain` and its antiquated NumPy, and I was
finally able to run some of the LangChain tutorials.  But installing Conda
messed with my regular Unix prompt, and I don't see a obvious way to fix it so
Conda only shows up where and when I really need it.  I have been using `venv`
on other Python test projects, and I'm not sure how or if I should be using it
in conjunction with Conda.  Or, if I should be using Conda only?!?

Why does it have to be so complicated?

And why are different implementations of LangChain so divergent?

In Java:

```java
result = model.generate(prompt.toUserMessage()).content();
```

In Ruby:

```ruby
result = model.chat(messages: messages)
```

In JavaScript:

```javascript
const chain = prompt.pipe(model).pipe(parser)
const result = await chain.invoke({ input: "dog" })
```

In Python:

```python
chain = prompt | model | parser
result = chain.invoke({"language": "italian", "text": "hi"})
```

Java's model has a `generate()` method.  Ruby's model does not.  JavaScript and
Python create a chain, but Java converts the prompt before passing it to the
model.  I was expecting the code to look more similar between all the languages.
Maybe things will converge later in the tutorials.
