I first discovered data-driven tests when I was working in Grails and the Spock
test framework.  They are a great way to test a piece of code with a wide
variety of inputs without having to write and maintain a separate test for each
variation.

Since then, I've been looking for data-driven test support in various languages:
Ruby, JavaScript, and Python.  Recently, I needed to write a data-driven test in
Java and I found a way to do so in the JUnit 4 I was using.

Just like I wrote a journal entry comparing regular expressions in various
languages, I figured I'd document how to write data-driven tests in various
languages.

On a separate note, I have been trying to use the
[hilite.me](https://hilite.me/) website to render code snippets.  That's easy
enough when there is only a single sample and it is kept very short.  It was
quite the challenge for the regex journal entry.  Here, I'm going to fall back
on regular Markdown fenced code blocks.  Overall, I find them easier to work
with, and I find they look better in my Tufte stylesheet.  If I can't have
syntax highlighting, at least the code that is there will be easy to read.

### Java &mdash; JUnit4 `@Parameterized`

[[JUnit4 docs](https://junit.org/junit4/javadoc/4.12/org/junit/runners/Parameterized.html)]

This is the most verbose sample.  Also, the data is specified on the entire
test class and each test in the class is run with each data variation.  This
means I cannot mix parameterized and non-parameterized tests in a single test
class.  Because the variations are typed as `Object[][]`, it can be awkward to
have a parameter that is a collection of values.

```java
@RunWith(Parameterized.class)
public class TestSomeClassUnderTest_withValidInputs {
    @Parameters(name="when the input is {0}")
    public static Object[][] data() {
        return new Object[][] {
            {"a string", "123", "123.00"},
            {"an integer", 123, "123.00"},
            {"a float", 123.0, "123.00"},
            {"a negative number", -123, "-123.00"},
            {"null", null, "null"},
        };
    }
    
    @Parameter(0)
    public String variation;
    
    @Parameter(1)
    public Object inut;
        
    @Parameter(2)
    public String expectedOutput
    
    private SomeClassUnderTest sut;
    
    @Before
    public void setUp() {
        sut = new SomeClassUnderTest();
    }
    
    @Test
    public void test() {
        var actualOutput = sut.someMethodUnderTest(input);
        assertEquals(variation, expectedOutput, actualOutput);
    }
}

public class TestSomeClassUnderTest_withInvalidInput {
    private SomeClassUnderTest sut;
    
    @Before
    public void setUp() {
        sut = new SomeClassUnderTest();
    }
    
    @Test(expected=Exception)
    public void test() {
        sut.someMethodUnderTest("invalid");
    }
}
```

### Groovy &mdash; Spock `expect`/`where` blocks

[[Spock docs](https://spockframework.org/spock/docs/2.3/data_driven_testing.html)]

This one is singular in that the variations are listed **after** the test logic.

```groovy
class SomeClassUnderTestSpec extends Specification {

    def sut = new SomeClassUnderTest()

    def "when the input is #variation"() {
        expect:
        sut.someMethodUnderTest(input) == expectedOutput
        
        where:
        variation          | input | expectedOutput
        "a string"         | "123" | "123.00"
        "an integer"       |   123 | "123.00"
        "a float"          | 123.0 | "123.00"
        "a nevative value" |  -123 | "-123.00"
        "null"             |  null | "null"
    }

    def "when the input is invalid"() {
        when:
        sut.someMethodUnderTest("invalid")
        
        then:
        thrown(Exception)
    }

}
```

### JavaScript &mdash; Jest `.each()`

[[Jest docs](https://jestjs.io/docs/api#testeachtablename-fn-timeout)]

```javascript
const sut = new SomeClassUnderTest()

describe("SomeClassUnderTest", () => {
    it.each([
        ['a string', '123', '123.0'],
        ['an integer', 123, '123.0'],
        ['a float', 123.0, '123.0'],
        ['a negative value', -123, '123.0'],
        ['null', null, 'null'],
    ])('when the input is $variation', (variation, input, expected_output) => {
        expect(sut.someMethodUnderTest(input)).toBe(expected_output)
    })
    
    it.failing('when the input is invalid', () => {
        sut.someMethodUnderTest('invalid')
    })
})
```

### Ruby &mdash; RSpec

I find this one to be the most elegant and the most compact.  It is not RSpec
that supports creating variations.  Instead, it uses a feature of the language
itself.

```ruby
RSpec.describe SomeClassUnderTest do
    describe '#some_method_under_test' do
        subject { described_class.new.some_method_under_test input_value }

        [
            [ 'a string', '123', '123.00' ],
            [ 'an integer', 123, '123.00' ],
            [ 'a float', 123.0, '123.00' ],
            [ 'a negative number', -123, '-123.00' ],
            [ 'nil', nil, 'nil' ],
        ].each do |variation, input, expected_output|
            describe 'when the input is #{variation}' do
                let(:input_value) { input }
                it { is_expected.to eq(expected_output) }
            end
        end
         
        describe 'when the input is invalid' do
            let(:input_value) { 'invalid' }
            it { expect { subject }.to raise_error }
        end
    end
end
```

### Python &mdash; pytest

[[pytest docs](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/reference/reference.html#pytest-mark-parametrize)]

Python's parameterized tests are also very compact and as a bonus, they combine
very nicely with pytest's fixtures.  For some reason, they call it
"_parametrize_", without the second letter 'e'.

```python
class TestSomeClassUnderTest:
    @pytest.fixture
    def sut(self):
        return SomeClassUnderTest()
    
    @pytest.mark.parametrize('variation,input,expected_output', [
        ('a string', '123', '123.00'),
        ('an integer', 123, '123.00'),
        ('a float', 123.0, '123.00'),
        ('a negative value', -123, '-123.00'),
        ('None', None, 'None'),
    ])
    def test_func(self, sut, variation, input, expected_output):
        assert sut.some_method_under_test(input) == expected_output
        
    def test_when_the_input_is_invalid(self, sut):
        with pytest.raises(Error):
            sut.some_method_under_test('invalid')
```
