After recent problems with Log4J, James Shore wrote an interesting blog post on
[the benefits of using open source software](https://www.jamesshore.com/v2/blog/2022/javascript-colors-and-the-corruption-of-buy-vs-build)
versus the cost and risks it might entail.  Reminds me a little of the `leftpad`
debacle from a few years back.

James Shore has an interesting heuristic when deciding
whether to use an  open source library versus rolling up his own.

There seems to be a trend of open source authors who are removing their
contributions, lately, like the JavaScript version of
[Faker](https://www.npmjs.com/package/faker).  Whe you put your code out there
and tell people to use it, it's a very dick move to yank it back and suddenly
break all these other projects.  Especially with something like NPM or Bundler
or Maven where people repeatedly download libraries all the time to refresh
their dependencies.  When a contributor yanks back their project, not only are
they messing up all those people who were depending on it, but they also
reduce confidence in open source code from all other contributors, too.  They
damage the entire community.  If they want to get paid for the code they write,
they should create commercial licenses for it.  There are many outfits out there
that let individuals use their code for non-commercial purposes (tinkering,
personal projects, proof-of-concepts) and demand a licensing fee for commercial
use.  Most commercial companies want to comply and will pay the licensing fee as
part of their compliance efforts.

This [YouTube video](https://youtu.be/ctkGh7RpgQ8) goes a little further into
the controversy around Faker in NPM, and our reliance on open source software.
The commenter advocates for a more level-headed approach when it comes to
including dependencies and their upgrades.  It might be possible to inspect the
direct changes to a dependent library, but you will not be able to keep track of
all transitive  dependencies, too.
