Follow up on Victor Skowronski from readers' letters in the December 2004
IEEE Computer magazine.  Readers comment on how Skowrowski either doesn't
really understand agile processes or doesn't give them a fair chance.  Agile
methods promote adaptability, adjusting themselves to their surroundings and
finding what works best for each individual team.  This point was completely
lost on Skowronski.

Of course, Skowronski had to respond.  When he is not dismissive of the
critique, he simply repeats himself.  He really sees the problem-solver / 
people skill relationship as a zero-sum game.  If you try to better skills on
one side, it can only be at the expense of the other.  Poppycock!  I thought
we'd moved past this idea in our understanding of personalities a long time
ago.

One of the readers and Skowronski worry that agile methods keep putting off
working on hard problems in favor of delivering features.  As a result, they
can let prevent a project from discovering fatal flaws until a lot of resources
have been spent already.  They must had skipped some pages when reading on
agile methods.  My understanding has always been that you tackle risk early on
agile peojects, precisely to ferret out risk and identify those possibly fatal
flaws as quickly as possible.  Such flaws may very well include the team not
being able to come up with a solution to a particular problem.  But the agile
team makes sure that the customer gets the most out of the project before they
possibly decide to cancel it.  And the customer, _in discussion with the agile team_,
controls priorities and decides which risks to tackle in which order.  The
customer holds the strings of the purse and gets to stear the project.  He or
she does not do so blindly, but informed from the regular and frequent
feedback from the developers.
