Back when I started working at Google, their philosophy was that people closer
to the work were best to make decisions about the work.  As a result,
contributors, and not managers, were in charge of technical decisions.  Managers
were there to help coordinate and remove obstacles.

It's probably still an important part of the Google engineering culture, though
I'm not sure how prevalent it is nowadays.  They've grown a lot since I was
there and not all the new managers subscribe to this approach.

I have been looking for this kind of culture ever since I left Google.  It looks
to me that over 90% of workplaces subscribe to the older model where
_the boss knows best_.  The manager makes the decisions and tells their
subordinates what to do.  These are relegated to the role of simple, dare I say
mindless, executants.  This may stroke the ego of the manager, who finds they
have power over others, but it leaves very little room for employees to exercise
their creativity.

I was reading
[Beyond "Outcomes Over Outputs"](https://hackernoon.com/beyond-outcomes-over-outputs-6b2677044214),
an article that discusses whether it is better to appear busy, even if this
busyness is not completely aligned with the company's objectives.  The article
mentioned _pull vs. push management_.  A quick search yielded
[a LinkedIn posting](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/20140913233240-52078660-push-versus-pull-management/)
that explains it, and I was glad to finally be able to put a name on the culture
I had experienced at Google, where managers _pull_ solutions from their teams,
as opposed to the old way of doing things, where managers _push_ solutions onto
their subordinates.  There are short-term gains to the _push_ model, but you
risk high turnover as talented contributors tire of being told what to do.  The
_pull_ model lets you tap your team's greater potential, but it requires more
trust that they will step up to the challenge.  I know quite a few managers who
do not trust their subordinates and who do not feel comfortable until they can
micromanage their employees directly and at all times.  "How can I manage a
remote employee if I cannot see what they are doing?"  To me, it just looks like
a lack of trust between the two.

I am seeking out _pull management_ environments.  I am not interested in the
push model.  Or its proponents, for that matter.
