Finished reading
[a study on _developer thriving_](https://www.pluralsight.com/resource-center/guides/developer-thriving-research-paper)
by social researchers in tech Hicks, Lee, and Ramsey.  It's a fairly thorough
look at what motivates sofware developers.  It made me think of Daniel Pink's
[Drive](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6452796-drive?from_search=true&from_srp=true&qid=U7XF0p1D2w&rank=1), 
but different.  They introduce the idea of _developer thriving_, when developers
can sustain high-quality work, and what that requires from the organization.  As
I was reading their methodology and their findings, I couldn't help but relate
them to the software organizations I've been in these past few years and how
they most often fell short.  Some from being clueless, and others from thinking
they knew best.

The article explores the use of development metrics.  It cannot look at specific
metrics because there is so much variation in the types of work that no one
metric fits all.  Their recommendations assume that the organization wants to
objectively get better and the leadership is not so convinced they know The One
True Way.  Developers are rightfully concerned that metrics can be weaponized,
interpreted out of context, and used against them.

Managers can have big impact by raising the visibility of development work, but
they struggle to do it right.  They need to be careful that it won't get
misunderstood by the business.

I found that many of the findings dealt with how individuals feel within their
organization and how to improve their direct experience.  There was only one
statement that considered the impact that one developer's experience might have
of their coworkers.

> if [visibility is] used to elevate developers who already felt overexposed in
> an organization, advocacy may have adverse effects (i.e. overshadowing or
> silencing other team contributions, or making underrepresented team members
> feel less important)
> <footer>Hicks, et al.</footer>

Team members are not all equal.  Some have more clout than others.  What may
encourage one person may negatively impact their coworkers' morale.

It's a very complex and touchy subject.  I liked the research rigor on display.
I also liked the multiple references to somewhat recent research in the social
environment in STEM work, and how they related it to software specifically.
