name: Victory_City
isbn: 0593243390
isbn13: 9780593243398
title: [Victory City: A Novel](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0593243390)
author: Salman Rushdie
publisher: Random House
year: 2023
acquired: 2023-02-06
start: 2023-08-14

The latest novel from Salman Rushdie.

_More to come._

This next quote reminds me of Umberto Eco's
[_Baudolino_](http://amzn.com/0156029065), where he also explored how our ideas
can shape reality.

> This was the paradox of the whispered stories: they were no more real than
> make-believe but they created the truth, [&hellip;]
> <footer>p. 47</footer>

Contradictions.

> Finally something that makes sense.  Let's go to war and bring peace to the
> land.
> <footer>p. 52</footer>

> I am the one who loves more strongly than he is loved.
> <footer>p. 65</footer>

Rushdie plays with the voice of the narrator.  He claims it is mostly his voice
but sometimes defers to the supposed voice of Pampa Kampana herself.

> In this way, Pampa learned the lesson every creator must learn, even God
> himself.  Once you had created your characters, you had to be bound by their
> choices.  You were no longer free to remake the according to your own desires.
> <footer>p. 100</footer>

> Or was this poetry, a fable like so many others?  We must reply: either it is
> all true, or none of it is, and we prefer to believe in the truth of the
> well-told tale.
> <footer>p. 122</footer>

There is a strange framing device.  Rushdie has the narrator read from the
_Jayaparajaya_, which was written by Pampa Kampana herself.  She may not be a
reliable narrator in the _Jayaparajaya_, but Rushdie's narrator is taking her at
her word.  The narrator is very complimentary of Pampa Kampana's verses, but
their English translations are somewhat mundane.  I think this effect is
voluntary on Rushdie's part, showing the limits of translations.

Zeralda Li is a map of space; she sees relationships between _here_ and _there_.
Pampa Kampana is a map of time; she sees relationships between _then_ and _now_.

There is a funny passage where the narrator pitches Pampa Kampana retellings of
the ascension of Krishna Raya to the throne against those of an Italian
chronicler.  Hers are peaceful and smart; his are brutal and bloody.  Rushdie
uses contrasting characters a lot in this novel.

Towards the end, Pampa Kampana reflects on the symmetry of her life.  At the
beginning of the story, she sought refuge with a friendly monk who turned out to
be an adversary.  After being blinded, she gets cared for by another monk whom
she thought was an adversary but turned out to be a friend or at least an ally.
At the beginning, she was whispering their story to the people of Bisnaga.  At
the end, they are the ones whispering their lives back to her.

> Pampa Kampana is the mistress of chronology, not its servant.
> <footer>p. 283</footer>
