name: God_Human_Animal_Machine
isbn: 0525562710
isbn13: 9780525562719
title: [God Human Animal Machine: Technology, Metaphor, and the Search for Meaning](https://www.amazon.com/God-Human-Animal-Machine-Technology/dp/0525562710)
author: Meghan O'Gieblyn
publisher: Anchor Books
year: 2021
acquired: 2023-06-18
start: 2023-06-22
stop: 2023-07-21

I received this book as a Fathers Day gift.

_More to come._

#### 2023-06-22 Chapters 1 and 2

Since Descartes, we've looked at mind-body dualism by boxing away the mind and
treating the body like a deterministic machine.  Modern philosophy pushed it to
its extreme by denying the mind even exists.  References to Dennett.  We're only
able to experience ourselves and our perception of the world through our own
mind, so this must be absurd.  Well built on top of works from other thinkers.

> this inner experience that has become impossible to prove &mdash; at least
> from a scientific standpoint.
> <footer>p. 19</footer>

We keep looking for distinguishing features of humanness. At first, to
distinguish us from animals.  Now, to distinguish us from smarter and smarter
machines.

#### 2023-06-26 Chapter 3

Kurzweil and transhumanism.  The author left religion but cannot reconcile the
loss of meaning to their existence.  Transhumanism promises a future with a form
of digital resurrection and immortality.  The history of the universe bends
towards the Singularity, much like ancient theologies bend towards the
Resurrection and the new Eden.  There is the unanswered question of identity:
whether resurrected or uploaded, where will the _real_ individual reside?  Is
it just the pattern of information (whirlpool in the river) that houses
consciousness?  Will creating a copy create a clone?  Which is the original and
which is the copy (cf. The Prestige).

---

Kurzweil and transhumanism.  O'Gieblyn left religion but cannot reconcile the
loss of meaning to their existence.  Transhumanism promises a future with a form
of digital resurrection and immortality.  The history of the universe bends
towards the Singularity, much like ancient theologies bend towards the
Resurrection and the new Eden.

There is the unanswered question of identity: whether resurrected or uploaded,
where will the _real_ individual reside?  Is it just the pattern of information
(whirlpool in the river) that houses consciousness?  Will creating a copy create
a clone? Which is the original and which is the copy (cf. The Prestige).

---

#### 2023-06-27 Chapter 4

New ideas are rehash of old ideas.  Transhumanists' singularity harkens back to
alchemists' philosopher stone and to early Christians' resurrection.  She brings
up Kurzweil working at Google but misses that he's working on NLP and not
pushing transhumanists' agenda.  Maybe transhumanists' yearning for singularity
is a restatement of their sublimated religious past.

Transhumanists view the singularity as all minds fusing in a harmonious
super-intelligence.  She even brings up Wikipedia, where authorship disappears
and the result is a distillation of all human knowledge.  But she misses that
Wikipedia is not authoritative because anyone can change anything.  No
accountability means bad actors can, and will, turn any communal work to shit.
Look at Twitter and other social media platforms!

#### 2023-07-03 Chapter 5

Emergent behavior in trees, bees, and robots. People imbue intelligence when
they can relate to the robot.  Instead of transhumanism's singularity, some look
forward to when nature, humans, and robots all live together in peace.  This
requires humans to get down from their pedestal and no longer view themselves as
superior to the rest of creation.

#### 2023-07-04 Chapter 6

---

Jewish golems illustrate our fascination with imbuing inanimate matter with
consciousness.  Same for our computers and robots.  Modern A.I. efforts not so
much create consciousness as they make us believe the robots are deserving of a
conscious consideration.  Turing tried to equate procreation, parents create a
shell, God gives it a soul, with A.I. creating a casing for a soul that God
might want to grant.

---

#### 2023-07-06 Chapter 7

> As the science fiction writer Philip K. Dick once put it, reality is "that
> which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away."
> <footer>p. 119</footer>

Measurement problem: Consciousness arising from the parts of the brain has
similarities to the physical world arising from quantum phenomena.  Both are
equally unexplained.

> Given that physics was founded on the separation of mind and matter, subject
> and object, it's unsurprising that two irreconcilable positions that attempt
> to answer this question have emerged: one that favors subjectivity, and other
> objectivity.  Bohr's view was that quantum physics describes our subjective
> experience of the world; it can tell us only about what we observe.
> [&hellip;]  Other interpretations of physics, like the multiverse theory or
> string theory, regard physics not as a language we invented but as a
> description of the real, objective world that exists out there, independent of
> us.
> <footer>pp. 135-136</footer>

---

Explores contradictions in physics.  Does Bohr's quantum mechanics require an
observer to collapse the wave function and create reality?  Deepak Chopra's
woo.  Or does objective reality exists on its own, beyond our perception?
Pascal's _cogito_ and the limits of our ability to comprehend the world.  Bohr:
superpositions coexist until subjective observation, multiverse: all versions
coexist objectively.

---

#### 2023-07-08 Chapter 8

---

Bosch's simulation theory.  Once you admit to the possibility of simulations
within simulations, it starts to resemble the multiverse.  Infinities next to
each other, with infinite regressions within each one.  The author questions if
all mental disorders originate in imbalances in the physical realm or if an idea
can just as well unhinge a mind.  The author's writings are always grounded in
the "I".

---

#### 2023-07-11 Chapter 9

Panpsychism is the reverse of Pascal's mind-matter duality.  Everything in the
universe has some modicum of consciousness and it is most expressed in humans.
It is convenient that humans are put back in the center of things.  Will the
author reach as far as Deepak Chopra and his quantum consciousness?

> I said that I didn't have any naive faith in language's ability to reveal
> truths; obviously words concealed as much as they communicated.
> <footer>p. 173</footer>

Friend predicts earthquake that will change the entire world, the US more than
anyone else, especially the South.  Were they predicting the Pandemic?

---

Panpsychism is the opposite of dualism.  All matter is infused with
consciousness and enough of it is in humans to produce our self-awareness.  Very
convenient that humans are special, once again.  Smells of Deepak Chopra and his
quantum consciousness.  The Internet risks pulling us into a global hive mind,
where parts will be subsumed into the whole.

---

#### 2023-07-14 Chapter 10

Idealism as the logical conclusion of materialism &rArr; dualism &rArr;
panpsychism &rArr; idealism.  All we can experience is consciousness, therefore
it is consciousness that is real and the material world is an illusion.

> Perhaps perception could extend beyond itself, beyond language, to touch the
> noumenal, the thing in itself.
> <footer>p. 187</footer>

The author realises her own religious bias.

> Since Copernicus and Galileo, science has overturned the most basic
> assumptions about reality and suggested that our sensory perception is
> unreliable.
> <footer>p. 185</footer>

Idealism and panpsychism offer tempting worldviews where the mind is back in the
world.  But science keeps breaking that model and science has proven again and
again that it is accurate in reflecting reality and we are succumbing to
illusions.

---

Idealism is the logical progression after panpsychism: everything is in the mind
and reality is an illusion.  But this fails to reconcile shared experiences
without resorting to a universal mind.  Some even suggest ech of us is an alter
of this universal mind's split personality.

---

#### 2023-07-18 Chapter 11

Mentions achievements of AI like DeepBlue (chess), AlphaGo (go) Deep Mind
(Jeopardy!), PredPol (crime prediction), COMPAS (recidivism), but fails to show
what would happen when their predictions are wrong/biased.  And how bias enters
from training sets.

> Just as according to Christianity we humans cannot understand God and His
> plan, do Dataism declares that the human brain cannot fathom the new master
> algorithms.
> <footer>Yuval Noah Karari, p. 211</footer>

---

Calvinists want us to accept God's will without question, as it is above the
comprehension of mortals.  Modern technologists want us to accept the AI
algorithms conclusions without question, as they are beyond our human
comprehension.  AI wanted to forge a god, and it recreated the one from our
mysticist past.  Mentions Euthyphro on p. 202.

---

#### 2023-07-19 Chapter 12

> we both maintained a private obsession with free will, a problem that is as
> vexed and unavoidable for the addict as it is for the theologian.
> <footer>p. 219</footer>

Free will versus predictions.  Statistical predictions work on large aggregates,
hinting that the world could be deterministic.  I lean more towards chaos
theory and uncertainty principle.  Individuals cannot be predicted with absolute
certainty, but large groups follow strange attractors.  Smells of psychohistory.

Protestant work ethics stems from not knowing one's salvation status. (p. 221)

Solove thinks modern information technologies less like Orwell's "Nineteen
Eighty-Four" and more like Kafka's "The Trial". (pp. 222-223)  Lack of
transparency and explainability, despite what companies are claiming.

> These systems do not target specific races or genders, or even take these
> factors into account.  But they often zero in on other information &mdash; zip
> codes, income, previous encounters with police &mdash; that are freighted with
> historic inequality.
> <footer>p. 237</footer>

Tay, a machine trained on Twitter, declared support for Hitler within 16 hours.

> The machine knew us better than we knew ourselves.  [&hellip;]  Rather than
> focusing on how to use science and technology to improve the human condition,
> we had come to believe that our instruments could connect us to higher truths.
> <footer>p. 239</footer>

> meaning is an implicitly human category
> <footer>p. 240</footer>

#### 2023-07-21 Chapter 13

[Lex Fridman interviewed Yuval Noah Harari](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mde2q7GFCrw),
including an excerpt on how
[history has a measure of arbitrary](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pxVmTlssGNY).

The COVID pandemic versus viral media.

> the term "influencers" &mdash; those masters of virality who capitalize on
> their social media presence &mdash; is an etymological outgrowth of
> "influenza."
> <footer>pp. 247-248</footer>

Treat Trump as a deep-learning AI without internal motives or reasons. (p. 255)

> governments opportunistically use crises and public emergencies to increase
> their power and erode constitutional rights.
> <footer>p. 260</footer>

---

Discussing viral media in the middle of a real pandemic.  The pandemic showed
how we became too comfortable with the virus metaphor.  But it also showed that
we were willing to sacrifice the economy to preserve human lives.  Up to a
point.  Back to anthropocentrism: we're not important or the center of the
universe, but we're still all that matters, really.

---
