name: Crack_Up_Capitalism
isbn: 1250871859
isbn13: 9781250871855
title: [Crack-Up Capitalism: Market Radicals and the Dream of a World Without Democracy](https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250753892/crackupcapitalism/)
author: Quinn Slobodian
publisher: Metropolitan
year: 2023
acquired: 2025-03-04
start: 2025-03-05
stop: 2025-03-21

The most terrifying book I've read in a very long time.

I saw an [interview (in French) with the author](https://youtu.be/XIsloWGL-98)
and I wanted to learn more.  His premise is that rich libertarians like Peter
Thiel would like nothing better than to be get rid of governments and leave
_everything_ to the private sector.  Market forces would find the perfect, most
optimal balance.  Governments, and the democracies that elect them, are just
misguided people second-guessing the laws of economic Nature.

When I hear this, I am reminded that public roads, paid for by taxes, are free
for all to use.  By contrast, private roads, like the ones in a logging
exploitation zone, are a maze of fees and special treatment, all at the whims of
the owner of each segment of road.  A complete nightmare to navigate.  Is this
the future these ultrarich billionaires envision for us?

> The proponents of crack-up capitalism envisioned a new utopia: an agile,
> restlessly mobile fortress for capital, protected from the grasping hands of
> the populace seeking a more equitable present and future.
> <footer>page 9</footer>

> He saw it as a place where "contract citizens" could come together in a true
> social contract, with no chance of infringement on private property in the
> name of "the common good."  There would be no collective politics beyond
> atomized individuals, who would be "the sovereign of themselves."
> <footer>page 194</footer>

"Atomized individuals" removes any change at collective bargaining.  Whoever
owns the capital has all the power in negotiations.  The people providing the
labor, without which the capital is useless, are powerless when each one has to
negotiate individually.  Their only chance at having an even-handed part in the
negotiations is to act together, in a coordinated manner.

### Hong Kong and Singapore

Hong Kong is an experiment in free market.  Government only protects business,
not people.  Capitalists have freedom, but people are trapped.  It only succeeds
by forcibly enslaving a large population (or exploiting the misery of migrants
fleeing poverty).  This
[video (in French)](https://youtu.be/tMIG3-KuMeU) shows how laborers fare in
Hong Kong.

London tried to re-create Hong Kong on Canary Wharf.  It worked while the tax
breaks lasted, but the money left when the breaks expired.  Corrupt foreigners
bought the real estate through shell companies.  Untangling the knots to
identify Russian oligarchs after the onset of the war in Ukraine showed the
weakness of the model.

> As the government went from seeing its role as facilitating an industrial or
> agricultural base to attracting mobile buyers, the city of shards appeared as
> a natural consequence &mdash; and so did the city of holes when the money
> dried up and the city of aliases when the money became too tainted.
> <footer>page 58</footer>

The _city of shards_ references the Shard building, which offshore billionaires
buy space in to park their money but do not physically occupy that space.  The
_city of holes_ is where funding falls through and the real estate project is
abandoned.  The _city of aliases_ is the shell companies that hide the
provenance of these funds: non-democratic sovereign states and oligarchs.

Other examples are gerrymandered development zones in New York City like Hudson
Yard (p. 55) and _pencil towers_ (p. 51) like 432 Park Avenue.

Singapore offers a different path: strong government control in support of
capitalism.  It uses Confucian ethos to control the population and make people
contribute to capitalism. The state intervention provides healthy labor to the
corporations.  Britain looks longingly, but cannot take as strong a stance. It
imitates somewhat through Brexit.

These economic zones only work if the government can ensure ever-increasing
property values, to feed the Ponzi scheme.

> It [Dubai] was unapologetic in its ostentatious celebration of wealth
> unburdened by hang-ups about inequality.  How did they do it?
> Authoritarianism was part of the answer.
> <footer>page 170</footer>

### Extractionists

Capitalists try to replicate the colonial model.  They find countries with weak
government and try to establish enclaves outside the local laws.  They try in
Honduras, in post-Apartheid South Africa, and in Somalia.  They use these
enclaves to draw the labor from the surrounding areas and weaken further the
host country.

> [&hellip;] the rich are sucked in, inflating property values, and the poor are
> expelled.
> <footer>page 53</footer>

> He imagined zones perforating existing polities and drawing away people and
> capital until the surrounding territories were left as husks.
> <footer>page 194</footer>

The capitalists extract all the capital they can, with hardly any benefit for
the local populations.

> Uber &mdash; did not offer an empty prairie on which to roam and build.
> Rather, if you were a driver, it pulled you along like a dog on a leash,
> [&hellip;]
> <footer>page 222</footer>

> The metaverse, as one critic has astutely observed, is probably best thought
> of as a cubicle.
> <footer>page 222</footer>

Eventually, popular discontent elects a government that dismantles the
experiments.  Capitalists dislike international law, but don't hesitate to
lean on it when it benefits them.  They're not idealists, they are hypocrites.
And, they are ruthless resource-grabbing thieves.

### Turning Back The Clock

The Friedmans (Milton, David, Patri) laud gated communities and a return to
medieval cities, where each community can make its own rules.  Same as HOAs and
company towns, you agree to live under the rules of someone else, or you move
out.  They still need the state to provide security, though many have their own
private security to enforce their idiosyncratic rules.

> Rothbard had said: repeal the twentieth century.  Hoppe's message was more
> extreme: repeal the millennium.
> <footer>page 111</footer>

> Hans-Hermann Hoppe was right:  monarchy was superior to democracy, since
> monarchs tended to the long-term wealth of their territories while elected
> officials plundered theirs during their time in office.
> <footer>page 171</footer>

Dubai sells itself to the highest bidder.  Its lack of democracy lets it make
decisions quickly, decisions that only benefit some.  It exploits foreign labor
by design.  No freedom of the press means it can hide how artificial it all is.

### Sociopaths

I was thinking that since the Renaissance, we were experiencing a rise in power
of the masses and a move away from autocrats.  Democracy allowed large groups
to set a social contract that benefited the most people.  It helped counter the
forces that lead to the
[tragedy of the commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons),
and it would allow humanity to act in concert to deal with large problems like
climate change.

This book describes a counter force.  Capitalism benefits from divisions within
society.  Small groups have less negotiation power and are easier to exploit by
unscrupulous individuals who want to accumulate resources at the expense of
everyone else.

The early United Nations discouraged minorities from seceding from their nations
(e.g., Québec).  The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the USSR led to
the creation of many new nations based on minorities.  Brexit and Czechoslovakia
are more blows to globalization efforts of the UN.

Secessionist movements in the US look at nation break-ups in former Soviet
Russia and the Balkans with envy.  Micro-nations in the Pacific counter the
power of super-powers at the UN.  This can become a problem if they undermine
global efforts to deal with global problems, like pollution and climate change.

Far Right demonstrations in the South (Charlottesville) and secessionists in
California (State of Jefferson), Oregon (ranchers occupying Malheur National
Wildlife Refuge) "were not nostalgic throwbacks to earlier eras of
self-sufficiency".  They are threats to the democratic way of life and a return
to an individualism that enables capitalists.

### Reality Will Catch Up

After all the horrors of unbridled capitalism, the book offers a ray of hope.
Large collectives can still overthrow capitalists.  Reality eventually takes
over and shows the benefits of modern societies, with rules and regulations.
The Grenfell Tower inferno (p. 55) killed 72 people and showed the consequence
of wild deregulation.

> Its [Singapore's] location at one degree above the equator, highly exposed to
> changing currents and extreme weather, puts it in the crosshairs of coming
> climate disaster.
> <footer>page 77</footer>

> It is in the same demographic trap as the rest of the industrialized world.
> An aging population is keen on protecting its social entitlements even as it
> grows ever more critical of the influx of new workers necessary to keep the
> system going.
> <footer>page 78</footer>

> capitalism's intractable contradictions: endless growth in the defiance of
> limits, social security for some based on the growing number of excluded, and
> the difficulty of securing the consent of the governed as economic spoils are
> ever more unevenly divided.
> <footer>page 78</footer>

> The road of secession, pointing toward the illusory promised land of
> unencumbered economic freedom, was not a one-way street.  [&hellip;]  The
> vision of the earth's surface as a circuit board with swappable components
> still had a formidable opponent in the elusive dream of people speaking in a
> democratic voice.
> <footer>page 200</footer>

All these capitalist dreams depend on the labor of the underclass and, in the
end, is at their mercy.

> Silicon Valley often forgets its Hegel at its own risk.  The German
> philosopher taught that the master is always dependent on the slave.
> <footer>page 222</footer>

Capitalists think of zones as cruise ships, but refrain from mentioning the
racialized hierarchy that keeps the ship's workforce disempowered.  They rely on
governments to pacify the locals and allow them to do as they please, with no
regard for the masses.

Exploitation cannot continue indefinitely.  Eventually, something has to give.
Whether it is Nature, or social order, or the resources themselves, a capitalist
project will come to an abrupt end.  The successful capitalists recognize the
warning signs and leave with their accumulated wealth before the end.  No one
wants to be the last person left holding the bag.

### Final Notes

The book is extremely well researched.  Every claim has a reference to its
source.  I ended up not reading all the notes, since the vast majority of
them were references to other works, with no elaboration in the note itself.  It
was nice to know I could fact-check what the author said nonetheless, if I
wanted to.

In Singapore, a _kampong_ is a traditional village.  Is Singapore the
inspiration for the fictitious nation of Kampong in
[Yoko Tsuno](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yoko_Tsuno)'s "Le canon de Kra"
adventure?  In the comic, the local economy is controlled by a foreign Japanese
industrialist.  The economy is Singapore is driven by ethnic Chinese.
