name: Apocalypse_Nerds
isbn13: 9791097088873
title: [Apocalypse Nerds](https://www.editionsdivergences.com/livre/apocalypse-nerds)
author: Nastasia Hadjadji
author: Olivier Tesquet
publisher: &Eacute;ditions Divergences
year: 2025
acquired: 2025-10-18
start: 2025-12-15
stop: 2025-12-25

What if the optimistic entrepreneurial spirit of Silicon Valley was just a sham?
What if it was a front for a secret cabal of capitalists hell-bent on destroying
democracy and installing themselves as despots?  The liberalism of Silicon
Valley is useful in weakening democratic institutions, and it makes these secret
masters immensely rich in the process.  When the government eventually,
inevitably encounters a crisis it cannot solve, they will be able to sweep it
aside and install themselves as the indisputable rulers.  They will establish a
new ruling class in their image: white and male, supported by discredited ideas
about eugenics.

This book by French journalists makes an adequate complement to
[Crack-Up Capitalism](#Crack_Up_Capitalism).  It is somewhat tangential to this
video by Dr. Fatima on the
[Technocracy movement](https://youtu.be/YAmzlB40hZs), and also to this Jessie
Gender video on
[tech fascists' obsession with Star Trek](https://youtu.be/V-7Spf1cLpU).

Peter Thiel has wanted to dismantle democracy since before he founded Paypal.
Over the years, he has put in place the structures to achieve his goal.  The
acronym TESCREAL describes the interconnected ideologies that find their
expression in Trumpism.  Trumpism is amorphous and that is its strength.  Its
adversaries cannot get a solid hold.  It has multiple, sometimes conflicting,
ideologies at its disposal that it can deploy piecemeal, when needed.

> l'id&eacute;al politique cyberlibertarien est satur&eacute; d'angles morts,
> d'impens&eacute;s et de raccourcis.  Le r&ocirc;le de la technologies est
> ainsi surinvesti.  V&eacute;ritable f&eacute;tiche, celle-ci est dot&eacute;e
> d'un pouvoir quasi-surnaturel, &agrave; l'image de la "main invisible du
> march&eacute;" chère aux n&eacute;olib&eacute;raux.
> <footer>p. 94</footer>

Cyberlibertarians are the new neoliberals, with technology playing the role of
market forces under Adam Smith.  They want to exploit immigrants but keep them
away from citizenship.  They want to recreate the partitioned landscape of the
Middle Ages.  Seasteading, Prospera in Honduras, experiments in Nigeria,
California Forever: none of these projects survived contact with real local
populations.

The transhumanism of Ray Kurzweil draws heavily from science-fiction and is just
the latest expression of (rich) people trying to break through the limitations
of human existence.  Medtech advocates find lots of rich old people afraid
of death and who are easy to part with their money.  The techno-elite wants to
defeat death, but only for rich white people.  Members of their social class
need to make more babies, while those they deem undeserving should be
sterilized.  The leaders of tech want necropolitics: the power to decide who
lives and who dies.

The last pages try to be optimistic by pointing out some successful revolutions
of the past where populations were successful in toppling an oppressive ruling
class.  But it offers no fleshed-out way to resist against the deep pockets
and intellectual ascendant of Peter Thiel, Elon Musk, and their ilk.

Colophon: the font the editor chose for the book has large diacritics that give
the text an odd appearance.  The text is in French, which uses a fair number of
diacritics.  These are usually subtle so they don't distract from ascenders and
the general shape of words.  But here, they really stand out, and I feel they
make the text harder to read.  It reminds me of the old trick of using single
quotes and backquotes to type diacritics on typewriters that don't have them.
