name: An_Introduction_to_Trading_in_the_Financial_Markets_Market_Basics
isbn: 0123748380
isbn13: 9780123748386
title: [An Introduction to Trading in the Financial Markets: Market Basics](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0123748380)
author: R. "Tee" Williams
publisher: Academic Press
year: 2010
start: 2022-03-21
stop: 2022-12-26

We're reading this book as part of a book club at work.

There are many parts to the financial systems and this is a easy introduction to
all of them, what they are, and how they fit together.  When I started reading
it, I was working at a firm that was building a marketplace and also offering a
custodial service.  I then moved to another firm that was acting as a financial
advisor, with a close relationship with a broker.  I liked being able to apply
what I was learning to my every day work.

**Fiduciary**: act prudently in the best interest of the client.

There are many, many ways to make money in a financial system.  One party may
charge fees while another may rely on appreciation.  There are plenty of
opportunities for conflicts of interest, which calls for various forms of
regulations.  Various firms can get very creative when finding ways to make
money and design financial instruments.

The book itself often comes across as very light and dry.  There are plenty of
illustrations, but they are very repetitive and don't always add much to the
main text.  Perhaps the other books in the series offer more depth or provide
some case studies.  This one gives a whirlwind tour of all the nomenclature, but
its dryness makes it hard for the more complex concepts to stick.

_More to come._

- Part 1 Entities (91)
    - Introduction (1)
    - Chapter 1 The Buy Side (19)
    - Chapter 2 The Sell Side (39)
    - Chapter 3 Markets (12)
    - Chapter 4 Support (14)
    - Chapter 5 Regulators (6)
- Part 2 Instruments (34)
    - Introduction (3)
    - Chapter 1 Cash (14)
    - Chapter 2 Derivatives Instruments (9)
    - Chapter 3 Packaged Instruments (8)
- Part 3 Markets and Marketplaces (7)
- Part 4 Functions (101)
    - Introduction (3)
    - Chapter 1 Categories (4)
    - Chapter 2 Buy Side (21)
    - Chapter 3 Sell Side (41)
    - Chapter 4 Exchanges and Other Marketplaces (10)
    - Chapter 5 Support (16)
    - Chapter 6 Education (6)
- Part 5 Technology (10)
- Part 6 Global Markets (3)
- Part 7 Risk Management (2)
- Part 8 Regulation (3)
- Part 9 Conclusion (36)
    - Conclusion (3)
    - Glossary (33)


Part 1 Ch 1 Buyers:
Retail investors also earn dividends. Fiduciary: act prudently in the best
interest of the client. Hedge funds seek more risk and they are only for
sophisticated investors.

Part 1 Ch 3 Sellers:
Brokers make money from fees and commissions, dealers make money from
appreciation of instruments. Retail dealers deal in bonds (fixed income). Market
makers: trader of last resort, with advantages. Merchant banks profit from the
operation of a company instead of just speculation. Venture: small companies.

Part 1 Ch 3 Markets:
Facility for matching buy and sell orders. Some exchanges (securities, liquid
derivatives) can be for-profit corporations with conflicts of interests. Dealer
associations (bonds, currencies) can be sanctioned by national regulators.
Brokers' brokers hide broker identities from one another for their strategic
advantage and cannot be dealers to avoid conflicts of interest.

Part 1 Ch 3 Markets:
Fees per-transaction (exchange) or per-share (broker). As transactions get
smaller, the two converge, leading to complex, dynamic pricing schemes. You can
buy shares in the company that runs an exchange without getting the right to
trade on that exchange.

Part 1 Ch 4 Support:
Clearing corporations insure the transaction while it is in progress.
Depositaries manage records of ownership. Banks allow transfer of funds (and
sometimes custody). Vendors are not on the buy or sell side of trades, but offer
services to entities: processing, data, communications. Clearing and depos earn
fees and "float". Banks do banking. Vendors charge licensing fees.

Part 1 Ch 4 Support:
It is interesting that banks can earn revenue by holding interest and dividend
payments on instruments whose owner cannot be identified.

Part 1 Ch 5 Regulators:
Some markets are under the auspices of a national government. Others are
self-regulated, especially when they cover many countries. Regulators protect
the participants in the market. They may charge fees or be subsidized by other
government revenues (taxes). If they charge too much, people will go to other
markets.

Part 2 Intro:
Definitions of instrument, securities, and derivatives can change with context.
Clarify with interlocutors. Nobody uses physical certificates of ownership
anymore.

Part 2 Ch 1 Cash:
These instruments confer ownership: equity, currency, goods. Stocks holders
share in the value and revenue (dividends) of the entity. Bonds yield interest
in terms or discount. See compounding. ForEx can be direct transactions or
backed by loans. Goods benefit from having recognized quantities and grades.
Markets enable variability in availability and demand.

Part 2 Ch 2 Derivatives:
Contracts in terms of an underlying instrument. Nothing happens when options
expire. Transaction is forced when futures (WFT?!?) expire. Forwards act like
custom futures, mostly for physical deliveries instead of speculation. Complex
derivatives allow entities to swap exposure, or broker/dealers to buffer them
while they try to offload them to other parties.

Part 2 Ch 3 Packaged Instruments:
Diversified portfolio. E.g., mutual funds (shares are created at purchase time
and liquidated on a sale).

Part 2 Ch 3 Packaged Instruments:
Mutual funds are incorporated, whereas unit trusts are not. In both cases, their
value is derived solely from the underlying instruments. EFTs have shares that
are traded on their own, so their value may diverge from the underying
portfolio.

Part 3 Markets:
Primary markets are where we create shares and bonds. Issuers get money for
them. Secondary markets are where people trade securities among themselves.
Issuers do not benefit from it directly, but an active secondary market makes it
easier for them to raise money on the primary market by creating more
securities.

Part 3 Markets:
If securities are created on the primary markets and traded on the secondary
markets, how do they "die"? Is there a mechanism for securities to end their
existence?

Part 4 Ch 2 Buy Side:
The Buy Side deals with investments for profit. Various functions revolve around
portfolio management, research, asset movement, and compliance. The distinction
between front-, middle-, and back-office is about distance to the client and
primary activity. Managing a portfolio is front. Producing reports is middle.
Ingesting trade data is back.

Part 4 Ch 3 Sell Side:
The Sell Side deals with customers and markets. Brokers are just agents for
their customers. Dealers (incl. market makers) invest their own capital and have
a treasury. Investment banking helps companies raise capital and M&A and is very
competitive. Middle: positions and block trading, compliance. Back: settlement,
cage, cashier.

Part 4 Ch 4 Exchanges:
Self-regulation (sometimes with oversight), listings for equities and
derivatives, selling market data. Marketing in exchanges sometimes yields new
market products, such as the Chicago Board Options Exchange.

Part 4 Ch 5 Support:
Clearing and settlement actively manage trades, from movement of monies to that
of securities. Banks manage payments and custodial duties and can use their own
positions to smooth transactions over.

Part 4 Ch 6 Education:
In the past, trades were self-taught and some had disdain for formal education.
Now, many have MBAs and quant trading relies on sophisticated software and
mathematics. Many lawyers, too. Many financial centers also have universities
nearby.

Part 5 Technology:
Technological advances mean people don't have to be physically present at
exchanges anymore. Systems are becoming more specialized and report to the CTO.
External market data and firm internal data are also becoming more specialized
and report to the CDO. Networks include public Internet but also SWIFT and
standards like FIX. They report to the CCO.

Part 6 Global Markets:
The three major regions are North America (New York, Chicago), Europe (London),
and Asia (Hong Kong, Singapore). There are important centers in Shanghai,
Germany, Montreal, Dubai, Zurich, etc.

Part 7 Risk Management:
Risk is complex and different people have different definitions. Firms try to
assess and manage their exposure based on many criteria.

Part 8 Regulation:
Protect investors, particularly unsofisticated ones, and national interests.
