name: La_grande_quincaillerie
isbn: 
isbn13: 
title: [La grande quincaillerie](https://www.noosfere.org/livres/niourf.asp?numlivre=1342)
title: <i>Big Hardware</i>
author: Georges Soria
publisher: Deno&euml;l
year: 1976
start: 2025-08-03
stop: 2025-08-10

I first read this when I was a teenager.  It was my first open-ended novel.  I
hated it at the time, but I have grown to like open-ended stories.  I remember
there was a mathematician in it.

In French, _quincaillerie_ means a hardware store.  But it can also mean a large
mechanical machine, one you would need an entire hardware store to build.  The
novel deals with computers, which, in 1976, were large mechanical-adjacent
machines.

The setup: in the most exclusive research institute in the nation, the best way
they've found to investigate topics is to have two teams fight over it.  Red vs.
Blue.  Each team consists of three people: a physicist, a linguist, and a
mathematician.  People's names are RedMath and BluePhys.  The Referee ensures
the rules are followed.  They live in a lodge high up in the mountains.  There
is behind-the-scene staff to man the computers, support the seven _important
people_, and provide security.

The challenge: design the perfect surveillance society, using the power of
computers to sift through vast amounts of data to assess everyone's potential
for criminality.  People are divided on the ethics of such a project.  The
Referee worries about his stellar reputation.

The writing style was a lot more self-absorbed than I remembered.  Pedantic and
pretentious are words that readily come to mind.  All the characters explode at
the slightest slight, whether perceived or imagined.  The narrator couches even
the most banal statements as provocations, to the point of including greetings.

The narrator keeps referring to the Referee as a "mandarin".  I wondered if he
meant the character was Chinese, but it turns out Europeans use the term to
refer to
[high-level civil servants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandarin_(bureaucrat)).
In France, it is used for a
[researcher of reknown](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandarin_(fonctionnaire))
who carries a lot of weight and influence in their field.

The author creates opportunities to present computer science concepts that were
novel at the time.  There is a nice example of modeling a real-world problem
using operations research and graph theory.  He also presents the latest
developments in computing, as of 1976.  These appear quaint by today's
standards.  I think the author really wanted to talk about these contemporary
technologies, without being a technologist himself.  Smells of the
Dunning-Kruger effect.

I read this book before going to university to study computer science, where I
was formally exposed to these concepts.  It must have flown way above my head
when I read it as a teenager.

The novel is weirdly prescient.  In it (1976), a whistleblower quits the
Institute and breaks the news of the coming surveillance state.  Years later
(2013), Edward Snowden would reveal the existence of a real-life surveillance
program run by Western nations.

In the end, the author cautions about ceding too much power to automated
machines.  According to him, Armageddon won't be unleashed by machines, but by
the people in the corridors of power.
