name: We_Just_Build_Hammers
isbn13: 
title: [We Just Build Hammers: Stories from the Past, Present, and Future of Responsible Tech](https://thehammerbook.com/)
author: Coraline Ada Ehmke
publisher: Apress
year: 2025
acquired: 2025-03-04
start: 2025-03-28
stop: 2025-04-09

I discovered Coraline Ada Ehmke when she was a host on the
[Greater Than Code](http://greaterthancode.com/) podcast.  She displayed a very
humanistic outlook in her interactions on the podcast.  I was excited to read
her first book.

The premise is very interesting: ideas that were first raised by science fiction
writers have had a deep influence in the sciences and in tech.  Authors see
threats to humanity and show what could happen if we are not careful.

H.G. Wells anticipated atomic power's potential for both global destruction and
plentiful energy production;  his characters work to prevent the global war and
ensure everyone benefits from the bounty.  Years later, Leo Szilard would echo
these ideas as he worked as part of Project Manhattan and on the control of
nuclear weapons after World War II.

Edmund Berkeley anticipated the great impact of computers.  He worked to
democratize access to computing technology and exhort practitioners to exercise
their ethical responsibility.  Many disagreed and maintained those who build a
tool are not responsible for how that tool is used.  Like the hammers in the
title.

Neal Stephenson anticipated how society went online and could be at the mercy
of a few large corporations;  he promoted a hacker culture where individuals
retained enough skills to mount an effective counter-power.  He inspired people
at MIT and elsewhere to create the Open Source movement and keep the in the
hands of the people.  Large corporations remain on the lookout for ways to
co-opt this movement to get free labor and keep the profits (and surveillance).

Samuel Delany anticipated a highly diverse society and the possibility of many
marginalized communities;  he proposed a model away from the homogenized, white
male-centric societies of Wells, Berkeley, and Stephenson.  He inspired early
social justice warriors and DEI efforts.  The counter currents have been very
powerful, turning SJW into a negative and dismantling many DEI efforts.  It's a
great game of "two steps forward, one step back," though it feels more like
five steps forward, four steps back, at times (e.g., losing Twitter).

All these authors share the same fundamental flaw: they expected members of
society to be rational actors.  Reality is much more messy.  Many people are
selfishly pursuing their own interests, and they do no hesitate to harness these
new technologies to reach their goals, not matter the cost to others.

> Wells emphasized the two ingredients he considered essential to the survival
> of the human race:  the globalization of governance, and the responsible
> application of new technologies.
> <footer>page 12</footer>

Wells' ingredients are in direct opposition to the goals of capitalists, as seen
in [_Crack-Up Capitalism_](#Crack_Up_Capitalism).  Industrialists want the
removal of global governance to better exploit local populations.  And, they
want maximal application of technology for maximal extraction of profits.

> As soon as antisocial human beings have access to the controls, the danger to
> society becomes great<label for="sn-2025-03-28-trade-war" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label>
> <input type="checkbox" id="sn-2025-03-28-trade-war" class="margin-toggle">
> <span class="sidenote">On 2025-04-02, the Trump administration announced a
number of new tariffs in an escalating trade war with the rest of the world.
The following day, as stock markets fell sharply,
[_The Majority Report_](https://youtu.be/k6qLMo_eeh0?si=J-pc7t8yKrztwrei&t=98)
contributor Emma Vigeland opined that "they have been using AI to implement mass
layoffs because they just want to destroy."</span>.  &mdash; Edmund Berkeley
> <footer>page 109</footer>

Berkeley failed to anticipate modern campaigns of disinformation and how they
can sow distrust in the institutions that support democratic societies.

> He [Berkeley] considered ignorance to be a lack of sophisticated knowledge,
> not a stubborn refutation of truth.
> <footer>page 110</footer>

> Berkeley saw prejudice as a natural phenomenon emerging from an emphasis on
> systems of belief over systems of knowledge.  He described the difficulty that
> humans have with sorting out beliefs from verifiable, objective facts.
> <footer>page 110</footer>

Many authors see their future societies as meritocratic instead of the random
autocracies of the past.  The best people would be carried to the top of power
structures and would be in the best position to steer the future of humanity.

> Meritocracy seemed to offer a solution to the problem of power disparities
> between computer programmers and their employers or institutions.  Traditional
> measures of authority were mocked and undermined, with managers and other
> nontechnical types deemed unworthy of much attention<label for="sn-2025-03-28-google-promo" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label>
> <input type="checkbox" id="sn-2025-03-28-google-promo" class="margin-toggle">
> <span class="sidenote">Reminds me of stories of promotion committees at Google
> for software engineers discarding manager feedback on candidates as
> irrelevant.</span>.
> <footer>page 146</footer>

The problem with meritocracy is that it favors early participants, who get to
start from a clean slate and make contributions with large impacts.  New
arrivals have to contend with an increasingly complex environment, and their
contributions will be much less likely to have a large impact, or else will
require much more effort.  The cost of "merit" grows over time.

> But everyone doesn't actually start on a level playing field;  in fact, the
> very differences that meritocracy was intended to erase make all the
> difference in who is allowed to participate.  With few exceptions, open source
> had always been dominated by white men.
> <footer>page 171</footer>

In the end, these authors and their detractors failed to account for human
irrationality as they envisioned societies of the future.

> But despite their best efforts, hackers couldn't make the world any more
> rational than the atomic scientists or Berkeley and his peers had before them.
> <footer>page 176</footer>

The book came out just at the second Trump administration got into the White
House.  The last part of the book discusses major changes in society for the
inclusion of minorities.  In the book, the struggles are ongoing, but society is
slowly making progress.  The Trump administration has been putting immense
pressure to dismantle DEI efforts across all levels of government, in private
enterprises, and even in foreign nations.  I find it very sad to see all this
progress laid to waste.

I do have a couple mild criticisms.  In the introduction, Ms. Ehmke uses Mary
Shelley's _Frankenstein_ to illustrate the importance of a technologist's ethics
and their responsibility for what they create.  Ehmke uses a well-known piece of
literature with a clear morale.  But in the main body of her book, she brings up
an obscure Wells works, _The World Set Free_, and a niche Stephenson novel,
_Snow Crash_.  While these works indubitably touched individuals like Leo
Szilard and Richard Stallman, and through them carried a wide indirect
influence, I don't know that they were widely known on their own.  I had never
heard of Edmund Berkeley, but I knew of the ACM.  This could be the result of
how he was sidestepped towards the end of his life.  I had never heard of Samuel
Delany either, but that's just my own ignorance of queer literature.  While I
was happy to discover these authors and their works, I initially thought we
would explore works of science fiction with more recognition.

My second criticism is that in a few places, the books becomes strangely
autobiographical.  Like on page 208, on pages 211-212, and again on pages
234-235.  Ms. Ehmke is a successful activist, and she covers some of her own
stumping ground.  But the effect is still a little jarring.  Up until then,
the book had been dealing with towering figures in their respective field:
Wells, Szilard, Stephenson, Berkeley.  I hesitate to put Ms. Ehmke on the same
level as them.

To end on a funny note, there is an interesting quote attributed to Edmund
Berkeley, under his pseudonym Neil Macdonald, roughly a quarter into the book.

> computers could be used to help address societal problems [&hellip;] or even
> "rendering accessible the enormous flood of scientific books and technical
> papers" being produced all around the world.
> <footer>page 78</footer>

When I read this, I was curious if Ms. Ehmke would tie it to Google's early goal
of organizing and making accessible the world's information.  And also to
[Project Ocean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Books) that tried to
digitize each and every book in the world.  Alas, she did not.  But now, I
wonder if Larry Page and Sergey Brin had ever read it.
