name: The_Dream_Hotel
isbn: 0593317602
isbn13: 9780593317600
title: [The Dream Hotel](https://a.co/d/i5S80MZ)
author: Laila Lalami
publisher: Pantheon
year: 2025
acquired: 2025-04-24
start: 2025-04-27
stop: 2025-08-02

I heard a review on NPR.  Someone getting incarcerated for something they didn't
do, solely based on information beyond their control.  Sounds terrifying.  Many
are relating it to Philip K. Dick's _Minority Report_, but from the
point-of-view of the person getting arrested.

We follow Sara, who is being "retained" because the algorithm decided she was a
danger.  The algorithm considers many, many inputs, so no one can point to any
single reason.  Her life is upended any nobody can tell her why, exactly.
Couple this with the pettiness and arbitrary of authority figures, who flag her
for minor infractions constantly, just to prove their power over her.  These
reports feed the algorithm further, where they are stripped of context and used
against her.  From the CPB officers at the beginning, to Senior Attendant
Hinton at the retention facility, all exert their power over her simply because
they can.

> A response, no matter how anodyne, might be used against her.
> <footer>page 5</footer>

It brings to mind the
[Stanford prison experiment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanford_prison_experiment).

I almost didn't make it past the first chapter.  In it, Lalami describes Sara's
experience at Customs, which is very anxiety-inducing.  Sara has to second guess
everything she says and try to read the minds of the officers.  Every time she
tries to clarify something, it is turned around and used against her.  In
parallel, we discover the life at the Madison retention center, its rhythms and
petty rules.

Chapter 2 shows the mental toll retention takes on the retainees.  From the
arbitrary of petty violations and a promise of freedom that keeps receding in
the future, to an administration that sees them as products and not human
beings.  It is a direct commentary on private, for-profit prisons.

With this, we're halfway through the novel already.  It is hard to see where the
story is going.  How will Sara win against all the forces arrayed against her?
Time of a twist: one of the retainees was a spy all along.  She's really a
researcher at the company that monitors their dream.  She was secretly testing a
new feature that injects subliminal ads in dreams for commercial purposes.

After a wild fire emergency, Sara finally reaches a breaking point.  Her review
has constantly been pushed back by the pettiness of the retention officers and
bureaucratic setbacks.  She finally realizes that the for-profit prison depends
on their labor, and she goes on strike.  We see her lowly regain bits of control
over her life, even if it's only in the narrow context of her retention.

It is a very slow buildup, and by the time we get to the first serious
confrontation, there are only 25 pages left.  Time for another twist: the chief
administrator pulls rank and has Sara released, overruling the algorithm and all
other petty people.  When Sara cusses him, he does not react; either because he
is so set on her release, or because she does not register to him as anything
else than a production unit.

In the ultimate twist, Sara betrays all the other characters to regain her
freedom.  She shows some guilt on the last page.  Maybe to set up a sequel, but
not really a cliffhanger either.

The ending is really rushed.  The first two chapters are more than half of the
novel.  They are setting the stage for interesting reflexions on incarceration
and the relations between those in power and minorities without any power.  The
twist at the halfway mark opens interesting questions of ethics and new avenues
for the plot, but Lalami makes little use of it.  Instead, the protagonist
latches on a plan out of the blue.  And as this new plotline picks up steam,
there are not enough pages left to really take it anywhere.  The ending is
abrupt, and ultimately unsatisfying.  It barely ties to what was in the second
half of the novel.  The heroine takes the easy way out and betrays all the other
characters in the novel.  She's a mother, and she picks her husband and children
in the end, which is understandable.  But they were very minor background
characters in the novel, which focused much, much more on the group of retainees
at Madison.  It is a very strange choice for the novel to abandon all that it
had built up in this way.
