name: Nimona
isbn: 0062278223
isbn13: 9780062278227
title: [Nimona](https://a.co/d/8B2q2Ne)
author: Noelle Stevenson
publisher: HarperTeen
year: 2015
start: 2024-10-24
stop: 2024-10-31

A funny comic book.  More of a graphic novel, really, as opposed to the other
comic books on this list by Sarah Andersen: _[Fangs](#Fangs)_ and
_[Cryptid Club](#Cryptid_Club)_.  This graphic novel was turned into a Netflix
movie in 2023.  I hadn't seen the movie, so I figured it'd be a good time to
read the original material first.

I don't usually comment in this blog on all the comic books I read.  They are
mainly _[bandes dessin&eacute;es](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bande_dessin%C3%A9e)_,
i.e., French comics.  This graphic novel is much longer than your average French
comics, so I'll say a few words.

Early on, the tone is very light and comedic.  The main characters gave me vibes
of _Pinky and the Brain_.  The setting is a strange mix of medieval esthetics
with modern amenities, like flat screen televisions, modern appliances, and
technologically advanced labs.  Some of it felt like the
[Carmen Sandiego](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carmen_Sandiego_(TV_series)) TV
show, in that Carmen Sandiego started as a villain but turned out good in the
end.  Most characters are caricatures of their given archetype.

About half-way through, the tone shifted and got much darker.  By the climax,
all the relationships had been upended, and it was anyone's guess how the story
would end.

I found the ending quite touching and strangely satisfying.  The ending was a
little rushed, and we were left with some few unanswered questions.  But, it
didn't detract from the message of acceptance and self-forgiveness that was at
the heart of the story.
