name: Shogun
isbn: 2891111931
isbn13: 9782891111935
title: Sh&omacr;gun, Le roman des samoura&iuml;s
title: [Sh&omacr;gun](https://a.co/d/7bYrQ5h)
author: James Clavell
publisher: Libre Expression
year: 1975
year: 1984
start: 2024-04-05

I'm reading the French translation of the book as I am watching the
[2024 adaptation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%8Dgun_(2024_miniseries))
with Hiroyuki Sanada.  And comparing both to the
[1980 adaptation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%8Dgun_(1980_miniseries))
with Richard Chamberlain and Toshiro Mifune.  I'm not reading the book in order,
but jumping here and there as I look for specific scenes and bits of the story.

The 1980 adaptation did a great job of showing everything from Blackthorne's
point-of-view.  We learned about the political situation in Japan, their
culture, and the Japanese language alongside Blackthorne.  There was a sense of
achievement as we managed to understand more and more as the story progressed.

I was disappointed that this aspect was not in the 2024 adaptation.  But then, I
was surprised to find out it was not in the novel either.  The 2024 adaptation
does a great job of playing with translations, including when two characters
clearly don't understand one another but still manage to communicate partially.
The parts that make it through contrast nicely with the parts that remain
misunderstood.

As far as the story goes, the novel is somewhat in between the two adaptations.
They left out large sections in the 1980 adaptation to spare the viewers of that
time.  They added bits and pieces in the 2024 adaptation to adjust to the
shifting tastes.  The 1980 adaptation uses the names as I see them in my French
translation of the novel.  The 2024 adaptation has changed some of the names.
I don't quite see the reasoning behind it.  Then again, I don't quite see the
reasoning behind the name changes in the novel to begin with.

_More to come._
