name: Un_occident_kidnappe
isbn: 2072966337
isbn13: 9782072966330
title: [Un occident kidnapp&eacute; ou la trag&eacute;die de l'Europe centrale](https://a.co/d/3PPWDXp)
title: [A Kidnapped West: The Tragedy of Central Europe](https://a.co/d/78zLasa)
author: Milan Kundera
publisher: Gallimard
year: 1967
year: 1983
year: 2021
acquired: 2024-11-16
start: 2024-12-25
stop: 2024-12-28

The book is a composite of two essays: _La litt&eacute;rature et les petites
nations_ (Literature and smaller nations, 1967) and _Un occident
kidnapp&eacute;_ (A kidnapped West, 1983).  The main thesis by Kundera deals
with Central Europe: Poland, Hungary, and the then Czechoslovakia.  Three
countries that are culturally part of Western Europe, but were abandoned behind
the Iron Curtain during the Cold War.

The first essay is Kundera's opinion of the future of a _small_ nation in the
face of globalization.  In 1967, Kundera addressed Czech writers to tell them
that the survival of Czech cultural identity depended on their contribution to
the larger culture.  Strong cultures can maintain an identity in the face of
globalization.  Weak cultures risk being absorbed and disappear.

I find it mirrors many of the challenges faced by Qu&eacute;bec society.  Czech
culture is surrounded by German and European influences.  Qu&eacute;bec culture
is surrounded by English and American influences.

One quote gave me pause:

> Toute r&eacute;pression d'une opinion, y compris la r&eacute;pression brutale
> d'opinions fausses, va au fond contre la v&eacute;rit&eacute;, cette
> v&eacute;rit&eacute; qu'on ne trouve qu'en confrontant des opinions libres et
> &eacute;gales.
> <footer>pp. 26-27</footer>

"Any repression of an opinion, uncluding the repression of false opinions, is
essentially against the truth, that truth we can only obtain from the
contest of opinions that are free and equal."  Kundera is visibly against the
repression of ideas.  False opinions will be rooted out in a free and fair
contest of ideas.  But what if the current (social) media do not offer a fair
arena for this contest of ideas?  What if false opinions (disinformation) have a
built-in 10x advantage?  What, then, are we to do to combat false information?
This first essay, written in 1967, could not predict our current predicament.

The second essay is much more specific to the experience of Central European
nations through the 19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> Centuries.

> la petite nation est celle dont l'existence peut &ecirc;tre &agrave; n'importe
> quel moment mise en question, qui peut dispara&icirc;tre, et qui le sait.  Un
> Fran&ccedil;ais, un Russe, un Anglais n'ont pas l'habitude de se poser des
> questions sur la survie de leur nation.  Leurs hymnes ne parlent que de
> grandeur et d'&eacute;ternit&eacute;.
> <footer>p. 63</footer>

"A small nation is one whose mere existence is always in question, it can
disappear at any moment, and it knows it.  A Frenchman, a Russian, an Englishman
never questions the survival of their own nation.  Their anthems speak only of
greatness and eternity."

Central Europe is made of "small nations," those that can envision the end of
their own existence, and it permeates the unique cultures they developed. The
Austro-Hungarian Empire provided a scaffolding and allowed these small nations
to be a source of great European cultural achievements, but its dismantlement
left its constituents exposed.  Russia is wide and unified.  Central Europe
always tried to be small but diverse.  Russian annexation was a very scary
prospect.

While Central European nations tried to preserve the importance of culture in
their societies as key to their (European) identity, they didn't see that other
Western nations were moving past a shared culture as a unifying European
principle.  At first, it had been religion that held Europe together.  Later, it
was a shared cultural identity and the Enlightenment.  Nowadays (for 1983), what
is it that ties Europe together?
