name: Dune_Messiah
isbn: 0593201736
isbn13: 9780593201732
title: [Dune Messiah](https://a.co/d/3rddoTy)
author: Frank Herbert
publisher: ACE
year: 1969
year: 2008
acquired: 2024-04-12
start: 2024-11-06
stop: 2024-12-19

The follow-up to [Dune](#Dune).  Apparently, early readers of Dune didn't quite
get that Paul was a bad guy.  So Herbert wrote this sequel to set them straight.

In a meeting between Paul and the Guild, they discuss the need for government
and religion to control the masses.  Everyone has big egos and are full of
themselves.  Paul and the jihad have killed **60 billions** and sterilized
planets.  We get a sense of the scale of the empire, which counts tens of
thousands of planets.

The novel is something of a study in fatality.  Paul cannot hope anymore; his
prescience reveals the outcome of his every action.  To him, prescience is a
curse.  He foresees many futures and must deliberately choose the one he thinks
is the least horrific.  He chooses to become blinded by the stone burner.  He
chooses to let Chani die.

> Where had he put his foot on the path that led to this journey across a
> crowded square on a planet so far from Caladan?  Had he really put his foot on
> that a path?  He could not say he had acted at any point in his life for one
> specific reason.
> <footer>p. 179</footer>

I didn't quite understand how the Guild Steersman can hide things from Paul's
prescience.  It looked a bit like lawyer's attorney-client privilege: if a
lawyer is involved, the discussion is protected from discovery.  It creates a
suspense to counter Paul's and Alia's prescience, so the reader will wonder at
the limits of their powers.  Most of the time, Paul sees through their
subterfuges, but lets events unfold because he sees an even worse future
otherwise.  The ghola of Duncan Idaho is interesting.  The Tleilaxu knew that
Paul would see through any imperfections, so the ghola is honest about its place
in a plot.  It is up to Paul to decide how far he plans to play the
conspirators' games.

>I'm a servant of the Atreides and I speak with candor.
> <footer>p. 128</footer>

Arrakis and its deserts are a constant backdrop.  Most characters yearn back to
the old ways of the Fremen and the simplicity of life in the deep desert.  The
first book expounded on the harsh reality of desert life and Fremen contempt for
non-desert life.  Now, we see Arrakis invaded by water and its impact on people.
City life is more comfortable and the Fremen are not sure about their place in
this new order.

There are some nice scenes.  The one at the council shows the interplay of the
Imperium, the Fremen, the conspiracy, the Guild, and the Bene Gesserit.  Some of
the emotions are hyped for the dramatic needs of the scene.  One would think
that Chani, Irulan, and everyone else would be in better control of their
emotions when in public.  The scene where Paul meets with the Reverend Mother
Gaius Helen Mohiham showcases the psychological effect of the scale of the
palace and its throne room, all meant to intimidate people before they get in
the presence of the emperor.

The climax is quite something.  Paul loses his vision, Chani dies, there are
twins.  Duncan breaks his compulsion, to prove that it can be done and so
Scytale can offer to revive Chani.  Paul kills Scytale.  Bijaz repeats the
offer, and Paul has him killed too.  The Bene Tleilax plan has failed.  Paul
surrenders to the desert, becoming a martyr to the Fremen and cementing his own
legend, something he's been trying to avoid for the whole novel.  Alia accepts
her love for Duncan.
