name: Apostles_of_Mercy
isbn: 1250274567
isbn13: 9781250274564
title: [Apostles of Mercy](https://a.co/d/fMfR6a1)
author: Lindsay Ellis
publisher: St. Martin's Press
year: 2024
acquired: 2024-06-03
start: 2024-06-08
stop: 2024-07-16

The follow-up to [_Axiom's End_](#Axioms_End) and
[_Truth of the Divine_](#Truth_of_the_Divine).  I was looking forward to where
the story will take us next.  Ellis hints at the title in the very first
epigrah, in a quote from H.G. Wells' _The War of the Worlds_.  I did have to
re-read the end of _Truth of the Devine_ to remind myself where Ellis had left
off.

In the first book, we focused on one human meeting one alien and the
complexities of communicating between two vastly different cultures.  There was
a severe power imbalance between the two characters, but they were both intent
on communicating.  There were factions within the human culture, each with their
own objectives.  And there were factions within the alien culture, each with
their own objectives.  There was one "genome" from a different alien species,
but its nature was not fully explored.  The book was pretty action heavy, with
the characters moving through multiple locations as the story unfolded.

In the second book, we were introduced to a second pair of human and alien.
Their dynamics were very different from the first pair and explored the clash of
cultures from a new angle.  The power imbalance was not as pronounced, but the
alien character was not as cooperating.  We learned more about the "sister
species" of the "genome", and that our main alien species has embarked on a
universe-wide campaign of eradication towards them.  There was significantly
less action as the book paid more attention to the characters' internal state.

In this third book, we are introduced to yet another human and alien pair, but
this time it's an alien of the "sister species".  There are diverging factions
within this species, too.  This time, one of the more advanced aliens is trust
into the role of translator, but doesn't smooth communications the way Cora had
been doing.  One part of the novel deals with establishing communication with a
secretive alien species.  The other part deals with deepening the understanding
between two individuals, letting them gain direct access to the other's inner
personality, their _noumenon_.

The high language experiment in Chapter 41 (pp. 314-322) is nicely done.  We
feel both the strangeness from Ampersand's point of view and the anticipation
from Cora, especially in the sexual encounter with Paris.  The writing captures
the intimacy from Cora and detached observation from Ampersand.  It melds their
points of view by using the _they_ pronoun throughout.  Both individuals are
feeling both points of view.

Nikola confirms that either humans will destroy themselves through climate
change, or will escape it and prove to the Superorganism they need to be
destroyed.

> Soon, inhabited part of your Earth will become uninhabitable.  Water will run
> dry.  Low-lying cities will flood.  Refugees will appeal to wealthier
> countries, and they will be refused entry,  Militarists will gain power with
> the promise of protecting their people from these refugees, and they will use
> their weapons to fight one another.
> <footer>p. 65</footer>

Ampersand is trying to keep his distance between himself and humans he could
potentially help, for fear they would become responsible for their well-being.
Obelus had hinted that Ampersand had inclinations to be an oligarch and would
come to rule the Earth if he stayed long enough.  The reader doesn't have access
to Ampersand's inner thoughts, so we must trust what he says.  But is he
reliable?  Could he be manipulating Cora, and everyone else, in a long game to
install himself as ruler?

> everyone on Earth is beneath him.
> <footer>p. 171</footer>

At the end of the second book, Cora and Ampersand had decided to abandon a
doomed Earth and leave it to its fate.  By this end of this book, they reflect
on why couldn't they be the ones to plot the course of humanity?

This book has a lot of exposition.  The first action scenes happen when we are
already 30% into the novel.

There are some references to cultural landmarks of 2009: Lady Gaga's _LoveGame_
and Ashton Kutcher's _Punk'd_.  This time around, I found the cultural
references to 2008 nostalgia more annoying than cute.  They always come out of
nowhere and don't contribute to the story.  They're just loud accents that don't
serve any real purpose.

On a separate note, on page 201, when Paris attempts to escape from the
physeterine pit, she goes about creating footholds in a manner very reminiscent
of a similar scene in the
_[Space: 1999](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space:_1999)_ episode
"[The Full Circle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Full_Circle)".  I used to
watch _Space: 1999_ as a kid, and I had just been re-watching episodes on
YouTube at the same time I was reading this book.  In the episode, Alan Carter
is trapped in a similar pit and tries to dig footholds in the sides to escape.
He doesn't have bones to work with, though, unlike Paris.  It's a funny
coincidence that I read this scene just as I watch this episode that I possibly
haven't seen in fifty years and wouldn't have remembered otherwise.  Maybe there
is a trope here that I am missing.
