name: Resister
isbn13: 9782228937597
title: [R&eacute;sister](https://www.payot-rivages.fr/payot/livre/r%C3%A9sister-edition-2026-9782228940627)
author: Salom&eacute; Saqu&eacute;
publisher: Payot
year: 2024
acquired: 2026-01-07
start: 2026-01-18
stop: 2026-01-22

A literary essay on the rise of the far right in France. The author is a
journalist at [Blast](https://www.blast-info.fr/), an independent French media
company.

The far right is on the verge of obtaining power in France, like it already has
in Italy, Poland, and Hungary.  It keeps promising it won't be like before, only
to entrench and radicalize itself once it gets elected.  It uses and abuses the
exception mechanisms in the Constitution to circumvent checks and balances to
its exercise of power.

The essay tells how the far right slowly acquired media empires to get its
message out.  It coordinates with the Atlas Network and their international
objectives for libertarianism and free markets.  They manipulate the public
discourse to move the Overton Window ever more to the right, and discredit any
and all opposition.  There is overlap with the manosphere and tradwives
movements.

The essay includes over thirty pages of concrete, actionable advice on how to
resist the far right.  Relegating the far right back to the trash bin of history
is a very daunting task, but there are things that the average reader can do to
resist it: use discrimination when selecting sources of information, be critical
about the information you consume, and get involved at the local level.

It reminded me of this quote towards the end of_The Lord of the Rings_.

> [...] others took new hope, hearing of a manful deed within their measure that
> they could turn to, [...]
> <footer>The Lord of the Rings, Book 5, Chapter 10</footer>

<span class="newthought">Note:</span> When I started reading this book, I found
out there was a new edition that had just came out in 2026-01.  I had ordered my
copy through Amazon and a US-based distributor, and received the older version.
Fun fact: the copyright on my copy says 2024-10 but the book was printed in
2025-10.
